Adobe Stock/Steve
How and when the American Water Spaniel breed was created is still a mystery, but it is known that the dogs originated from the Great Lakes region of the U.S., where these spaniels were primarily used for retrieving waterfowl and game birds.
As medium-sized dogs, American Water Spaniels have a shoulder height of 15–18 inches and a weight of 25–45 pounds.
These spaniels are perfect boating companions due to their size and natural love for water and adventure. Their muscular bodies are protected by a waterproof, thick coat, and their paws are webbed to allow them to glide easily through the water.
The American Water Spaniel’s temperament makes them excellent family dogs, but they can be reserved around strangers. They’re also very active and must have a way to burn off their energy every day—or they may be destructive. Because of this, American Water Spaniels do best living with an active, outdoorsy family.
Begin training and socializing your American Water Spaniel puppy as soon you bring them home. This is an important process that helps your dog grow to be confident and well-behaved, no matter the situation. You can also train your American Water Spaniel to work by your side as a hunting dog.
An American Water Spaniel’s coat is always brown, but its texture can be curly or wavy. Their coat requires brushing weekly most of the year, even though this breed doesn’t shed very much. The brushing helps prevent matting and removes any debris that gets entangled in their curly coats.  When the weather starts to warm up, brush your pup more often to help strip their undercoat.
The American Water Spaniel is generally a healthy dog breed with an average lifespan of 10–14 years. However, they do have some medical predispositions, just like all dog breeds.
Hip dysplasia is an inherited orthopedic condition where the top of the femur doesn’t sit snugly in the hip joint as it should. Because of this, the femoral head tends to rub against the hip socket, leading to arthritis over time.
Hip dysplasia can develop in one or both hip joints. Symptoms may include:
Lameness
Slowness to rise from a lying-down position
Bunny-hopping gait when running
Reluctance to run, jump, or go up or down stairs
Holding the affected leg out to the side when sitting up
Treatment varies depending on the severity. In some cases, hip dysplasia can be managed through joint supplements, medications, and reduced activity. In other cases, a dog may need surgery to correct hip dysplasia.
Degenerative myelopathy (DM) is a genetic disorder that affects the spinal cord, leading to weakness and eventually paralysis of the hind limbs. American Water Spaniels with this condition are usually middle-aged.
DM can be managed for a period of time with physical therapy, but eventually this disease progresses. Humane euthanasia is often pursued due to a poor quality of life.
Pattern baldness can also be seen in some American Water Spaniels. The hair becomes thin starting around 6 months of age and occurs on several areas of the body. The locations of hair loss are usually symmetrical on both sides of the body.
Treatment is unnecessary because this condition does not affect a dog’s health. However, melatonin can sometimes be helpful with some fur regrowth. Talk to your veterinarian before giving your dog melatonin.
American Water Spaniel dogs can develop a few different eye conditions, including:
Cataracts: A cataract is a cloudy lens within the eye. When large enough, they affect a dog’s vision. Severe cataracts can be surgically removed to improve eyesight.
Distichiasis: This is an inherited condition that causes extra eyelashes to grow and rub against a dog’s eye, causing irritation and ulcers. Surgery is needed to remove the extra eyelashes and stop them from regrowing.
Retinal dysplasia: This genetic condition is when the retina (a light-sensitive part of the eye) doesn’t develop correctly. Dogs with mild cases may not be affected, but others can become blind. There’s no treatment for this condition, but blind dogs can live long and happy lives with help from their pet parents.
American Water Spaniels need to eat high-quality dog food, formulated for a medium-sized breed, that meets the nutritional standards set by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Ask your veterinarian for guidance on choosing the best dog food for your pup.
American Water Spaniels do well with twice-daily feedings on a consistent schedule. They should also be fed a diet that matches their life stage. For instance:
American Water Spaniel puppies need a puppy-formulated food
Adults need a dog food made for medium-sized adult dogs
Senior dogs benefit from a senior-specific food to meet their unique needs as they age
No more than 10% of their daily diet should consist of dog treats.
Dog food packaging provides guidance on how much to feed your dog based on their ideal weight. Measuring their food is key, as this breed is prone to being overweight; obesity in dogs can worsen or cause other health issues.
Your veterinarian can also provide additional guidance on how to feed your American Water Spaniel based on their health, lifestyle, and age.
A healthy American Water Spaniel eating an AAFCO-compliant dog food shouldn't need nutritional supplements, as high-quality food is formulated to provide all key nutrients they need to live healthy lives.
However, there are situations that might prompt a veterinarian to recommend supplements for your dog. For example, American Water Spaniels with hip dysplasia may benefit from a joint supplement and an omega-3 fatty acid supplement to reduce joint inflammation.
Talk with your veterinarian to find out if your American Water Spaniel would benefit from a supplement.
American Water Spaniels are affectionate dogs that enjoy spending time with their families. This breed has a lot of energy and needs a way to unleash their energy daily, such as going swimming, or for a hike or run. If they are left alone for an extended time, they can be destructive out of boredom.
American Water Spaniels can do well with other pets and children if they are socialized and properly trained when young.
While friendly with familiar people, American Water Spaniels can be more reserved around strangers. However, proper socialization as puppies can reduce or prevent this behavior.
This breed can also be susceptible to separation anxiety, as they prefer to spend as much time as possible with their family. They will bark if they are ignored or not given a way to expend their energy. They also have a strong prey drive and may dig to chase after a wild animal, like a rabbit.
Make sure your dog has enough exercise and mental stimulation so you can help prevent these unwanted behaviors.
Because of their affection and keen intellect, American Water Spaniels are generally considered easy to train. However, they can also be strong-willed. Always use positive reinforcement methods and keep sessions engaging. These dogs enjoy entertaining their loved ones and receiving rewards for good behavior.
American Water Spaniels need to be properly socialized when they’re puppies so they feel comfortable around new people, other pets, and children.
Riding in and jumping out of a boat
Hunting waterfowl and other game birds
Swimming
Barn hunt
Flyball
Tracking
Hiking
The American Water Spaniel has either a wavy or curly coat in a shade of brown. They shed less than most other dog breeds but need to be brushed weekly to prevent matting.
Brushing will also help remove burrs, sticks, or leaves that can become tangled in your dog’s fur as they run through fields and swim.
According to the American Water Spaniel Club, this breed needs a bath every three months or when the coat is dirty. They do not have special skin care needs, but contact your vet if you notice changes such as redness or flakiness.
It’s important to keep all dogs, especially outdoorsy breeds like the American Water Spaniel, on year-round heartworm and flea and tick prevention.
American Water Spaniels have a double-layered coat to protect them when they are swimming, running through a field, or in a harsh environment. Although they don’t shed much, they shed more heavily in the spring and fall. Their coat needs to be brushed weekly year-round, but you may need to brush your dog more often during heavier shedding periods.
The American Water Spaniel breed club recommends a few brushes for keeping your dog groomed, including a metal comb, a slicker brush, a pin brush, and a dematting brush.
American Water Spaniels are predisposed to a few eye conditions, so it’s important to have your dog examined by a vet at least once or twice a year (depending on your pup’s age). If you notice redness, squinting, drainage, or vision issues, schedule an eye exam for your dog as soon as possible.
Due to their love of swimming, American Water Spaniels are prone to ear infections because moisture can become trapped in their ear canal.
It’s best to keep the fur trimmed near the entrance of the ear canal to prevent infections. You also need to clean your dog’s ears with a vet-approved ear cleaner after every water activity, such as swimming and bathing.
American Water Spaniels are fun-loving, athletic dogs that prefer to be with their pet parents as often as possible. Their perfect home would be living with an active family that has children and other dogs to play with.
It’s also important that family members are not gone long hours, as American Water Spaniels need companionship and attention or they will become bored, loud, and destructive. This breed has a lot of energy and needs to be given ways to release this energy, such as swimming, hiking, or hunting.
Their grooming needs are relatively minimal because they do not shed much through most of the year. An occasional bath and weekly brushing usually keep an American Water Spaniel looking great, but they require more frequent brushing to help strip their undercoat when the weather starts to warm up.
Yes, American Water Spaniels make great family dogs if they are properly trained and socialized as puppies.
It depends on the dog; American Water Spaniels are smart dogs but they can also have an independent streak. Positive reinforcement is the best method for training.
No, the American Water Spaniel breed doesn’t shed much during most of the year, but they still need to be brushed weekly to prevent matting.
According to the American Water Spaniel Club, there are only about 3,000 American Water Spaniels currently in existence.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
I live in Raleigh, North Carolina. I obtained by BS degree in Biology at UNC-Chapel Hill in 2000 and my DVM degree at NCSU in 2006. I have...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.