Elise Schmelzer
iStock/Yuliya Golland
American Bulldogs boast a variety of jobs held over the centuries: guardians, cattle chasers, farm dogs, and hunting partners. Though the breed has been in the United States since the 17th century, the American Bulldog started to become more popular in the late 1980s, according to the American Bulldog Association (ABA). 
This medium-large and muscular breed can reach up to 25 inches tall and weigh between 60 and 100 pounds. American Bulldogs are generally brave and loyal animals that require dedicated training and regular activity. 
American Bulldogs are loyal, intelligent, and active dogs who require focused training and plenty of exercise. They love to spend their days playing tug-of-war, running agility courses, and going on long walks with their pet parents. With proper care and attention, they can be an excellent addition to your home.    
These dogs have a short, mostly white coat that can have a few different-colored markings—it’s not uncommon to find a white and brindle American Bulldog or a white and black American Bulldog. No matter their color, this breed doesn’t shed a lot. But their skin care requires careful attention. 
The average American Bulldog lifespan is 10–12 years. Like most dogs, there are some common health issues associated with the breed—especially with their skin. 
According to the ABA, American Bulldogs, like many other larger dog breeds, can be prone to elbow dysplasia and hip dysplasia. These conditions are where those joints don’t fit together properly. This can cause pain and, if left untreated, arthritis. Responsible American Bulldog breeders will screen their dogs for this genetic condition.   
American Bulldogs can have allergies caused by an overactive immune system, according to the ABA. Signs that your dog has allergies include:  
Itchy skin and scratching
Fur loss
Excessive licking
Red skin 
Recurring skin infections
Ear infections
If you notice any of these signs in your American Bulldog, contact your veterinarian for guidance.  
Although it’s rare, American Bulldog puppies can be born with a skin condition called ichthyosis, which causes the skin to flake and become itchy, according to the ABA. The disease is a genetic mutation that prevents the outer layer of skin from developing properly and can range from moderate to severe.
American Bulldogs with mild cases of ichthyosis require more frequent bathing with medicated shampoo, while dogs with severe cases need to be bathed and oiled every day. As with hip and elbow dysplasia, responsible American Bulldog breeders will test their pups for ichthyosis.
A healthy American Bulldog will be lean and well-muscled with little fat and with no ribs showing—your veterinarian can show you how to assess your dog’s body condition score. To maintain a muscular build, the breed needs food that’s rich in protein, with limited carbohydrates.
Feeding your big American Bulldog a diet formulated for large-breed dogs as both a puppy and an adult is recommended for optimal growth and wellness.  
American Bulldog puppies are typically fed three times each day. It’s important to consult with your veterinarian as you create your puppy feeding schedule with the right balance between meeting their nutritional needs while also warding off digestive problems or obesity. 
As American Bulldog puppies mature, feeding them two meals a day is recommended. Pet parents should look for options that meet the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) nutrition standards when choosing food.
To give your American Bulldog a bit of mental stimulation during mealtimes, offer them food in a slow feeder, puzzle toy, or snuffle mat.
The amount of food pet parents provide daily depends on their individual dog’s needs and lifestyle. The bag of AAFCO-compliant dog food will give you guidance on portions based on your dog’s weight. But it’s best to ask your veterinarian how much to feed your dog.
Avoid feeding your dog table scraps, which may be dangerous to their health. Treats should make up only 10% of your American Bulldog’s calorie intake and never replace a diet.    
Dogs fed a complete and balanced commercial food diet should not need any nutritional supplements unless recommended by a veterinarian. That’s why it’s so important to pick a food that’s specific to your American Bulldog’s life stage (puppy, adult, or senior).
However, your vet might recommend certain supplements depending on your dog’s health, such as probiotics, fish oil or joint supplements. Never give your dog a supplement without your vet’s guidance. 
American Bulldog’s personality makes them generally outgoing and friendly dogs, according to the ABA. Because they are so loyal to their family, they may bark to alert you when anything seems out of the ordinary. A well-trained and socialized American Bulldog can typically get along with other pets and with young children.  
Because of their history as working dogs and guardians, and because of how much they love their family, American Bulldogs may be guarded around new people at first. As with every other dog breed, early training and socialization is vital for American Bulldog puppies.
American Bulldogs are large, active dogs who need to be kept busy physically and mentally. The amount of exercise your pup needs depends on your dog’s age and health status, but healthy adult American Bulldogs typically need one to two hours of exercise daily. Playtime and long walks are important—though they also enjoy a good afternoon nap.   
Pull quote: A well-trained and socialized American Bulldog can typically get along with other pets and with young children.
American Bulldogs require dedicated training from their pet parents. Luckily, they are a smart dog breed that’s eager to please. They can pick up training cues quickly, especially when training sessions are done consistently, patiently, and with positive reinforcement.  
Begin socializing your American Bulldog puppy as soon as you bring them home. Early exposure to new people, environments, animals, and other stimuli will help your little puppy grow into a confident and well-mannered dog. Your vet can give you tips on socialization.
Nose work
Agility
Dock diving
Lure coursing 
Obedience work
Hiking
Swimming 
Tug-of-war 
American Bulldogs require a moderate level of grooming and care. While their short coat is easier to maintain than long-haired dogs, their wrinkles and skin need lots of attention. 
Like most dogs, American Bulldogs need a bath when they are dirty or smelly. Use a dog-friendly shampoo—never one meant for humans.
The American Bulldog’s wrinkles require special attention. It’s important to keep them clean from dirt and any other debris that might build up, or skin infections can occur. Pet parents might also need to wipe down their facial folds throughout the day to remove lingering dog food crumbs. 
Contact your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s skin.
American Bulldogs have a short, low-maintenance coat, and pet parents can brush them weekly to catch any loose hairs. This routine keeps their coat looking healthy—and they will love the attention.
Grooming time is also a great chance to check for cuts, fleas, ticks, lumps and bumps, rashes, or other problems.  
American Bulldogs typically don’t require any special eye care. Some dogs, especially white American Bulldogs, can get brown discoloration around their eyes from tearing. Gentle cleaning with an eye cleaning solution can help minimize these tear stains. 
American Bulldogs can be susceptible to ear wax buildup, so it’s important to clean your dog’s ears once a week using a vet-recommended ear cleanser. Talk to your vet if your dog experiences recurring ear infections—this is a sign of a larger underlying issue, such as allergies.
Before bringing home an American Bulldog puppy, it’s important to consider your lifestyle. Are you a jogger or do you like to go on long weekend hikes? An American Bulldog can fit right in. Are you a homebody who lives in a studio apartment? Adopting an American Bulldog might not be the best fit.
These dogs won’t do well in a low-energy home without outlets for their physical energy. They need a pet parent who is dedicated to exercising and training.
The average American Bulldog lifespan is 10–12 years.  
Yes. With proper training and exercise, the American Bulldog can be a great addition to your family. Breed experts recommend early and consistent socialization and obedience training for this intelligent and energetic breed.
Sort of! According to the Animal Humane Society, the American Pit Bull Terrier isn’t truly a dog breed—the term refers to a group of breeds, including American Bulldogs, American Staffordshire Terriers, and Staffordshire Bull Terriers, and various mixes between these breeds.
Purebred American Bulldogs can cost more than $1,000, though you can also find American Bulldogs (and puppies!) in shelters and rescues. 
Though both are Bulldog breeds, the English Bulldog and American Bulldog are quite different. At 40–50 pounds, English Bulldogs are smaller than American Bulldogs. American Bulldogs are also much more active than English Bulldogs, who are relatively low-energy dogs. 
WRITTEN BY
Elise Schmelzer
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.