Kristen Seymour
Adobe Stock/EllenMoran
Equal parts cute, cuddly, and clever, the Cavapoo is a small (8–25 pound) crossbreed between the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel and a Miniature Poodle or Toy Poodle.
Cavapoos have a friendly, playful nature and tend to go with the flow when they get plenty of love and attention from their people. This makes them a good pick for many families, including first-time pet parents.
Thanks to their Poodle parentage, the coat of some Cavapoos may be low-shedding, which can make them a good option for people with allergies—if you’re willing to take on the responsibility of consistent grooming, that is.
If you’re looking for a sociable, adaptable, adorable little friend, the Cavapoo may be perfect for you. Erin Askeland, CPDT-KA, CBCC-KA, and Camp Bow Wow's animal health and behavior consultant, describes the hybrid as gentle and even-keeled. 
“They aren’t lazy, but they are definitely one of the more low-key Poodle mixes because Cavs are so gentle; they really get along with anyone, including people and animals,” Askeland says. “They can be really good for a first-time dog parent because they’re usually not too much for someone to handle.”
Askeland adds that Cavapoos generally do well with children who know how to play gently with dogs, are comfortable in homes from tiny apartments to big houses with yards, and don’t require vigorous exercise. If you’re looking for a buddy to join you on long runs, another breed would be a better fit.
Cavapoo puppies and adults require regular grooming to keep their coats from becoming unruly. And because they love being with their people so much, separation anxiety can be an issue if not addressed early on.
Cavapoos tend to be a healthy breed, with a typical lifespan of 12–15 years. But that doesn’t mean they’re free from health concerns.
“While it's true that hybrid dogs can sometimes have fewer health issues than their purebred parents, it's not a guarantee,” says Sabrina Kong, DVM, veterinarian at the Jules Veterinary Center in Northern California and a veterinary contributor at We Love Doodles. “In fact, hybrid dogs can still be prone to certain health issues that are common in both parent breeds, so it's crucial for pet parents to research the health issues that are common in both parent breeds before deciding on a hybrid dog breed.”
Hip dysplasia occurs in dogs when their hip joint doesn’t develop properly, leading to a loose joint that can then progress to arthritis, muscle atrophy, and limited mobility.
Although this is more common in large dog breeds, hip dysplasia can be a problem in both Cavapoo parent breeds, so watch for signs of joint pain or reduced mobility. Your vet can advise you on whether joint supplements, pain medication, or surgery may be helpful.
In many small dogs, including the Cavapoo, patellar luxation can be an issue. This means their kneecap slides outside of its correct path, which may cause pain and, eventually, arthritis.
Joint supplements can help in mild cases, and anti-inflammatory medications are also commonly used in treatment. For severe cases, surgery may be required. If you notice your pet limping, bunny hopping, or skipping, tell your veterinarian.
Both parent breeds are prone to eye problems:
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels can develop entropion, corneal dystrophy, ingrown eyelashes, dry eye, retinal problems, cataracts, and more.
Poodles can have issues with progressive retinal atrophy, entropion, glaucoma, ingrown eyelashes, cataracts, and more.
As a Cavalier-Poodle combo, eye health can be a concern for Cavapoo dogs. If you notice any abnormalities of the eyes, including poor vision, discharge, redness, or squinting, contact your veterinarian for an examination.
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels have a hereditary link to syringomyelia, or the development of fluid-filled cavities in the spinal cord. This condition is usually secondary to Chiari-like malformation, which is abnormal formation of one of the skull bones.
While Kong says it’s not common, it is possible for Cavapoos to develop this because they have Cavalier roots.
Syringomyelia, or “neck scratcher’s disease,” causes abnormal sensations and pain. Symptoms can include signs of discomfort, posture changes, a wobbly gait (ataxia), or scratching, rubbing, or pawing at affected areas.
Your vet will rely on a physical exam, lab work, and diagnostic imaging to determine whether syringomyelia or CLM is the cause of your dog’s symptoms. If it is, they’ll talk to you about pain medications, whether surgery is an option, and if alternative treatments (such as acupuncture) could help.
Some dogs live symptom-free for years, while others are severely impacted by pain.
Like other small dogs, the Cavapoo is susceptible to dental disease, which not only causes bad breath, but can also lead to painful infections, tooth loss, and even organ failure if left untreated.
To help prevent this, bring your Cavapoo to the vet for regular checkups, have your veterinarian perform a dental cleaning when recommended, and practice good oral hygiene at home by toothbrushing. However, be aware that your pup may still need a tooth (or more) pulled at some point.
Mitral valve disease (MVD) is an inherited condition and a leading cause of death for the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Poodles are also at increased risk for MVD, so it’s important that pet parents work with reputable breeders when searching for a Cavapoo puppy
“Responsible breeders should provide proof of the parent's heart health,” Kong says. “To prevent heart disease from spreading through breeding lines, Cavalier King Charles Spaniels [and Poodles] with heart murmurs or diagnosed MVD should not be used for breeding.”  
The symptoms of allergies in Cavapoos can manifest in several ways, Kong says. This includes:
Excessive itching and scratching
Licking or biting their skin
Red, inflamed skin
Hair loss
Repeated ear infections
Hot spots
Gastrointestinal problems
Respiratory issues
Treatment will depend on the cause and may include:
Most allergies can be managed with appropriate medical treatment.
“However, keep in mind that allergies may require lifelong management, and some dogs may be more prone to flare-ups or require ongoing medication,” Kong says. “Closely monitoring your Cavapoo for any signs of allergies and consulting your veterinarian promptly is the best way to go.”
Choose a commercially available food that complies with the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) guidelines. However, if you notice changes in your Cavapoo’s skin, coat, waste, or behavior, a change of food may be in order.
“Some Cavapoos may have allergies or sensitivities to certain ingredients, so you need to always be aware and observe any reactions they may have so you can adjust their diet accordingly,” Kong says.
Talk to your veterinarian if you suspect their food may be causing your pup’s problems. And remember It’s always best to consult with your dog’s veterinarian before making any dietary changes.
Feed your Cavapoo a measured amount of a life stage-appropriate (puppy, adult, senior) food. Cavapoo puppies need three to four small meals daily on a consistent schedule, as this helps maintain blood sugar levels and prevent hypoglycemia. Cavapoo adults can eat twice a day.
And remember: This is a small dog, so even a couple of treats every day can significantly add to the calorie count! Dog treats should never make up more than 10% of your Cavapoo’s daily diet.
The label on your pup’s dog food should provide a starting point for how much to feed your Cavapoo, based on size. But chatting with your vet about other variables—like age, activity level, and current body condition—will help determine whether your dog could use a little more (or less) kibble.
Because the Cavapoo can experience hip dysplasia and patellar luxation, your vet may recommend food or treats with a joint supplement. However, many Cavapoos will receive all necessary nutrients from their food alone.
Never give your dog a supplement without speaking to your vet first.
If you have pets or other people at home, your Cavapoo will likely love them all. These happy little dogs are content to always be by your side, whether you’re out running errands or hanging out at home. “This is very, very much a flexible family dog,” Askeland says.
That said, the Cavapoo’s people-centric personality can be a challenge for some pet parents.
“Because they have such a strong attachment to their families, they may be a little more prone to exhibit signs of separation anxiety and get upset when their family leaves them, whether that just means they’re in another room and can’t get to them, or leave the house as a whole,” Askeland says.
The potential for separation anxiety—which can lead to undesirable behaviors such as chewing or barking—is the biggest consideration with this breed.
To help dogs with separation anxiety, give your Cavapoo a mentally stimulating activity like a KONG, lick mat, or puzzle toy whenever they’re left alone. Increasing exercise and crate training your Cavapoo puppy can also help dogs with mild anxiety. A comprehensive behavioral modification plan is usually necessary for severe cases of separation anxiety
Otherwise, Cavapoos tend to be friendly, confident, and eager to please.
With a bright mind and people-pleasing nature, the Cavapoo responds well to positive reinforcement training. Once they’ve mastered the basic cues, Cavapoos can really shine when learning tricks with their people, Askeland says.
“Fun tricks involving them being close to you”—like teaching them to weave between your legs or jump through a hoop—"would be a fun activity and something they would likely thrive in,” she says.
Learning tricks
Obedience training
Therapy dog work
Neighborhood walks
Food puzzles
Fetch
Cuddling at home
“Cavapoos have a low-shedding coat that requires regular grooming to prevent matting and tangling,” Kong says. “Regular brushing, bathing, and trimming are all parts of grooming a Cavapoo.”
Additionally, says Kong, “Ear and eye cleaning are also crucial to prevent infections, as well as cleaning their teeth regularly to prevent dental issues.”
Keep an eye on your Cavapoo’s skin for signs of allergies, such as recurring skin infections and itchiness. Talk to your vet right away if you notice redness, dryness, or increased scratching.
Plan on brushing your Cavapoo about three times a week. Book a grooming appointment every six weeks—or learn how to use professional tools to keep that beautiful coat from tangling and causing painful mats.
The best brush for your dog depends on the type of coat they inherit. A small slicker brush works well for Cavapoos with curlier, Poodle-like hair while a pin brush is a good option for dogs with straighter hair.
Cleaning your Cavapoo’s eyes isn’t only important in terms of preventing infection, but it’s also an opportunity to notice changes that could indicate an eye condition. Call your vet if you notice eye changes in your dog.
Some Cavapoos might develop tear stains; these can easily be wiped away with a dog-safe eye cleaner.
Clean your Cavapoo’s ears when you groom them and keep an eye on their ears between cleanings. If they suffer from allergies, their ears could become itchy and infected. You might smell an infection, see debris in the ear canal, or notice your dog shaking their head or scratching their ears.
Many Cavapoos will need to have their nails trimmed every four to six weeks. Using a nail clipper designed for small dogs or an adjustable nail grinder helps make the task easier.
As long as you’re prepared to provide your Cavapoo with lots of love, attention, and grooming, this is an adaptable dog that makes a wonderful addition to all kinds of families. Light to moderate exercise, paired with reward-based training and food puzzles to engage your Cavapoo’s bright mind, will go a long way toward keeping your pup happy in whatever home you have. 
Keep in mind, though, that no dog is truly hypoallergenic—Cavapoos included.
“While they do have low-shedding coats, some may still produce allergens that can cause reactions in sensitive individuals,” Kong says. “Hybrid dogs can vary in their temperament, appearance, and health depending on the parent breeds. Research and understand the potential traits and health issues associated with both parent breeds before making the final decision on a hybrid dog breed.”
The Cavapoo is a relatively small breed that’s usually 8–25 pounds and 9–14 inches tall. The Poodle side of this mix can be a Miniature Poodle or Toy Poodle, which can affect the size of your full-grown Cavapoo.
While the Cavapoo, like other Poodle mixes, is sometimes referred to as hypoallergenic, no dog is truly allergen-free. Because they’re bred to have low-shedding coats, though, they may be a better option for people with allergies than a breed that sheds heavily.
This little dog has an impressive lifespan that typically ranges 12–15 years. 
As a designer hybrid, the Cavapoo is not a purebred dog recognized by the American Kennel Club, and that can make it easy for disreputable breeders to get into the Cavapoo game.
Reputable, professional Cavapoo breeders—who provide health guarantees based on recommended genetic testing—will likely charge $2,000–$4,000 for Cavapoo puppies, but that may fluctuate based on location and other factors.
Understanding a Cavapoo vs. a Cockapoo is pretty simple. A Cavapoo is a cross between the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel and Miniature Poodle or Toy Poodle. With a Cockapoo, that CKC Spaniel side is swapped out for a Cocker Spaniel.
It depends on what you consider “high maintenance.” Cavapoo dogs require a lot of grooming compared to some other breeds, but their exercise needs are relatively low. They may also have more health problems than some other hybrid dogs.
WRITTEN BY
Kristen Seymour
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.