Adobe Stock/Dennis
Records of the first Curly-Coated Retrievers date back to the late 1700s, making this breed one of oldest known retriever breeds. They look a bit like a Golden Retriever with a curly coat: Curlies, as the dogs are often called, are named after their waterproof black or liver (brown) coat made of small, tight curls.
Curly-Coated Retrievers are loyal family dogs that are extremely intelligent. They are also known for being excellent bird hunting dogs. They stand 23–27 inches tall at the shoulder and weigh 60–95 pounds.
Curly-Coated Retrievers are incredibly smart dogs that are easy to train using praise and treats as positive rewards. Because they’re so active, Curly-Coated Retriever puppies need to go through proper training when young, such as puppy training, socialization, and obedience training to turn them into well-behaved adult dogs.
Curlies are affectionate toward their family members but can be standoffish around strangers—another reason why early and consistent socialization is so important.
Their short, curly coat is easy to maintain, as it consists of a single layer. Brushing this dog breed is discouraged because it can cause the curls to become frizzy.
The typical Curly-Coated Retriever lifespan is 10–12 years. They’re considered a healthy dog breed, but, just like other dog breeds, they are predisposed to a few medical conditions.
Curly-Coated Retrievers can develop a handful of eye conditions over their lifetime, including:
Cataracts: A cataract occurs when the lens within the eye becomes cloudy. The cataract’s size determines the degree of vision impairment, and your pup might need surgery to remove the cataract to restore eyesight.
Distichiasis: This is when extra eyelashes grow on the edge of an eyelid and rub against the eye’s surface, causing irritation and possibly corneal ulcers. Surgery can correct this, though some dogs will need to have the surgery repeated in the future.
Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA): PRA causes the retina to slowly degenerate, leading to blindness. There is no cure, but blind dogs can live a long, happy life with proper care.
Hip dysplasia is an inherited orthopedic condition where the head of the femur doesn’t sit snugly in the hip joint. This causes friction between the bone and hip socket. Over time, this leads to arthritis.
Hip dysplasia can develop in one or both hips. Symptoms include:
Lameness
Slowness to rise when lying down
Bunny-hopping gait when running
Reluctance to run, jump, or go up or down stairs
Holding the affected leg to the side when sitting
Treatment varies depending on the severity. In some cases, hip dysplasia can be managed through supplements, medications, and activity restrictions. In severe cases, a dog may need to undergo surgery.
Exercise-induced collapse (EIC) is an inherited neuromuscular disease that first affects the hind limbs. After exercise, the hind legs of Curly-Coated Retrievers with EIC will suddenly become weak. This can lead to a lack of coordination and possibly collapse.
Dogs usually recover but can have more episodes in the future. During an episode, a dog’s temperature can reach 107 degrees Fahrenheit, which is life-threatening. Call your veterinarian immediately if your dog is experiencing an EIC episode.
A dog DNA test can detect whether a Curly-Coated Retriever carries the genetic mutation for EIC.
Glycogen storage disease type IIIa is an inherited disorder in Curly-Coated Retrievers where glycogen, a stored form of glucose, accumulates in the liver and sometimes the kidneys, starting around 4 months of age. These glycogen deposits lead to hypoglycemia (low glucose level) and elevated liver enzymes in routine blood work—and then eventually low liver values as the liver starts to fail.
Symptoms include:
Stunted growth
Decreased appetite
Lethargy
Vomiting
Regurgitation
Dull mental state
Supportive care can be provided to help address hypoglycemia temporarily, but the disease ultimately progresses and most affected dogs are humanely euthanized. Curly-Coated Retriever breeders should have their dogs tested for the genetic mutation that causes glycogen storage disease.
Deep-chested dogs like the Curly-Coated Retriever are prone to gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV). This is a severe form of bloat and occurs when a gas- or fluid-filled stomach twists, cutting off blood circulation to the stomach and other organs. GDV is an extremely painful condition and fatal if emergency surgery is not performed immediately.
To minimize the risk of GDV in your Curly-Coated Retriever:
Have a gastropexy procedure, where the stomach is secured to prevent twisting, done at the time of your dog’s spay or neuter surgery.
Feed your dog two or three meals a day, instead of one.
Restrict exercise right before and after your dog eats.
Avoid using elevated food bowls.
Curly-Coated Retrievers are prone to a few types of cancer, such as osteosarcoma, mast cell tumors, and hemangiosarcoma. According to the Breed Archive, senior dogs are most prone to cancer and are often diagnosed between 8–11 years of age.
Curly-Coated Retriever puppies under 1 year old should be fed a high-quality puppy food made for large dogs. Puppy food will provide the extra calories a Curly-Coated Retriever puppy needs to grow to their full potential.
Once they reach adulthood, they will need to transition to a high-quality, large-breed adult food, which has fewer calories to prevent unwanted weight gain.
Make sure the bags for the puppy formula and the adult formula have the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) statement, which means the food was properly tested and passed nutrition requirements.
Curly-Coated Retrievers should be fed twice daily: morning and evening. They love to eat and are known to eat very quickly. If you notice your dog gobbling down food during mealtime, consider a slow-feeding bowl to regulate the amount of food your dog can eat at one time. This also prevents regurgitation and stomach upset that can happen if they eat too quickly.
Curly-Coated Retriever puppies have rapid growth spurts, so you’ll need to increase their food portions as they mature. To determine how much to feed your dog, check the feeding guidelines on the bag and talk to your veterinarian. Your vet can help you keep your Curly-Coated Retriever at a healthy weight as they grow.
An AAFCO-compliant dog food will give your Curly-Coated Retriever all the necessary nutrients, but your vet might recommend a dog supplement depending on your individual pup’s health needs.
For example, starting a Curly-Coated Retriever on a joint supplement early in life can help slow or minimize arthritis. Never give your dog a supplement without consulting your vet first.
Curly-Coated Retrievers are extremely affectionate with their family members and do well with children who know how to interact with pets correctly. Curlies aren’t as outgoing and friendly as some other retrievers, like the Golden or Labrador, and they might be reserved around new people at first.
Curly-Coated Retriever dogs are high energy and need an outlet to unleash this energy, such as playing outdoors, going on a long walk or run, or swimming. They need about two hours of exercise every day. This also means Curlies can be destructive if they are left alone for several hours with no attention or entertainment, such as interactive toys.
They can do well with other pets if they go through proper socialization and training when young.
Training a Curly-Coated Retriever can be challenging. Although they are smart dogs and eager to please their humans, they get bored quickly. Their training must be engaging and enjoyable to maintain their attention. For new dog parents, it’s best to find a reputable dog trainer with experience working with this breed.
Curly-Coated Retriever puppies need to begin socialization as soon as you bring them home. Ask your vet how to effectively and safely expose your pup to new people, animals, environments, and situations. This will help your dog grow into a confident adult.
Swimming
Hunting birds and rabbits
Retrieving
Running
Cuddling
Hiking
Playing Frisbee®
Curly-Coated Retrievers have tight, thick curls that frame their body. Their coat comes in only two colors: liver or black. When it comes to grooming, this breed is considered low-maintenance.
This breed rarely needs a bath, but you should bathe your dog any time they swim or get particularly dirty. When you do give your dog a bath, let their coat air-dry afterward to protect their curly locks.
It’s best not to brush a Curly-Coated Retriever, as this will make their curls become frizzy. A professional groomer is also unnecessary for this breed due to their low-maintenance coat. Their curly locks are not prone to matting.
They don’t have an undercoat and therefore don’t shed much except for yearly or twice-yearly shedding seasons (spring and fall). During these times of slightly heavier shedding, a rake brush can be useful for removing dead hair.
Curly-Coated Retrievers are prone to several eye conditions, so it’s important to have annual routine checkups for your dog. Make a vet appointment if you notice eye redness, drainage, squinting, or vision issues.
Due to their floppy ears and love for swimming, Curly-Coated Retrievers are prone to ear infections. You can minimize the risk of ear infections by cleaning their ears every two to three weeks with an ear cleaner that contains a drying agent. Do this after baths and swimming.
Curly-Coated Retrievers are fun-loving dogs with a lot of energy. The perfect home for a Curly-Coated Retriever has a large, fenced yard so they have a place to run and burn off some energy. They do best as members of an active family who will take them for long walks, weekend hikes, swimming sessions, and hunting trips.
Curly-Coated Retrievers can play well with children and other dogs if they are properly socialized when young. They aren’t known to be excessive barkers, but they might bark to alert their pet parents or to entertain themselves if they are bored. It’s important to have your Curly-Coated Retriever puppy go through training classes so they are well behaved throughout their life.
Yes, Curly-Coated Retrievers are rare dogs, especially compared to the popular Labrador Retrievers and Golden Retrievers. According to the Breed Archive, fewer than 300 Curly-Coated Retrievers were born in 2023.
Curly-Coated Retrievers are not considered excessive year-round shedders. Typically, males shed once a year, and females shed every six months.
The typical price for a Curly-Coated Retriever puppy varies, but they usually cost $1,000–$3,000.
Yes, Curly-Coated Retrievers adore cuddle time with their family members—if they’ve gotten enough exercise for the day.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
I live in Raleigh, North Carolina. I obtained by BS degree in Biology at UNC-Chapel Hill in 2000 and my DVM degree at NCSU in 2006. I have...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.