Patricia Kaowthumrong
iStock/EvgeniiAnd
The popular Labradoodle—a mix of a Labrador Retriever and Standard Poodle—is beloved for their minimal shedding and affectionate nature. The smart, playful pups are excellent family dogs, but pet parents must be devoted to supplying their four-legged friends with the proper training, a moderate amount of daily exercise, a regular grooming schedule, and plenty of love.
Labradoodles have long, curly coats that require an extensive grooming routine to keep their fur from becoming unruly, which can lead to uncomfortable mats and knots.
While the breed is often referred to as hypoallergenic, no dog is truly allergen-free. But Labradoodles are known to not shed much, though this is dependent on the coat type and some Labradoodles shed more than others.
The average Labradoodle weighs 50–75 pounds and the dogs are about 25 inches tall when full-grown. There are also Mini Labradoodles, which are Labs mixed with Miniature Poodles. These dogs are smaller; a full-grown Mini Labradoodle is 16–20 inches tall and around 30 pounds.  
Labradoodle dogs can thrive in homes of all sizes—as long as they’re given the right amount of daily exercise. They are extremely friendly and loyal, making them wonderful family dogs. Labradoodles are also easy to train and ideal dogs for first-time pet parents seeking a companion with a big personality. 
Because Labradoodles are a mix of a Labrador Retriever and Standard Poodle, they are prone to the common health conditions of both breeds, says Jamie Whittenburg, DVM.  
While pet insurance can help pet parents manage the costs of dealing with health issues, these conditions can also be prevented by Labradoodle breeders thoroughly screening their breeding stock. “This should include genetic testing, eye exams, OFA or PennHIP testing, and echocardiograms,” Whittenburg says.  
Labradoodles can develop progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), cataracts, and glaucoma.
PRA is an inherited disorder that causes the deterioration of the retina, a light-sensitive layer of cells in the eye, which can gradually lead to blindness, says Rhea Morgan, DVM for Veterinary Information Network’s Veterinary Partner.
PRA isn’t a painful condition, but warning signs can include night blindness (for example, your pup might be clumsy in the dark or refuse to go outside in dim light). While there is no treatment for PRA, it can take months or years for the disease to fully impair a dog’s eyesight. And blind dogs can live long and happy lives with a little help from their pet parents.
Cataracts are common in Labradoodle, and cause clouding in the eyes that can eventually lead to vision loss, according to Wendy Brooks, DVM for Veterinary Partner. If you notice your Labradoodle’s lenses have a cloudy or opaque appearance or that your buddy’s vision has become more limited, consult a veterinarian. Cataracts can be removed through surgery.
Glaucoma is an eye condition where pressure builds within the eye. This causes the eye to be inflamed, discolored, and painful.
Contact your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision.
Hip dysplasia is a common condition in large- and giant-breed dogs that develops as your Labradoodle puppy grows and the hips develop abnormally. Common signs of hip dysplasia include:
Lameness
Limping
A bunny-hopping gait
Trouble standing up, jumping, and going up or down stairs
There are many options for treating hip dysplasia, from joint supplements to anti-inflammatory medications to surgery. Consult your vet to find the best fit for your Labradoodle.
Heart disease is a common issue for many dog breeds, including Labradoodles. It can be caused by underlying conditions such as heart valve degeneration, irregular heart rate and rhythm (arrhythmia), and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM).   
Be alert for signs such as: 
Persistent cough 
Fainting or collapse
Difficulty breathing 
Fatigue 
Behavior changes (loss of appetite, reluctance to engage, etc.)  
If you notice any of these signs, make an appointment with your vet as soon as possible. A veterinarian can perform screenings such as chest X-rays, blood tests, and an echocardiogram (an ultrasound of the heart and nearby blood vessels) to assess the issue.
The condition can be serious if left untreated, but thankfully there are many treatment options available, such as diet changes and medication.  
To live a long and happy life, Labradoodles must eat a high-quality dog food and have access to fresh water. A balanced diet will help your pup maintain a healthy weight.
When choosing a dog food, pet parents should look for options that meet the nutritional standards set by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), such as Purina Pro Plan, Hill’s Science Diet, and Royal Canin. 
Labradoodles should eat two meals of a high-quality dog food per day. Labradoodle puppies under 6 months old may need to eat more frequently.
Labrador Retrievers have a reputation for being food-motivated. If your Labradoodle takes after this trait and chows down on their meals too quickly, try using a slow feeder bowl or interactive food-dispensing toy to slow them down and prevent stomach upset. This also provides much-needed mental stimulation.
While there is no one-size-fits-all way to feed a Labradoodle, so talk to your vet to see what they recommend for your dog, Whittenburg says.
“​​Though adults can technically be fed once a day, this can lead to anxiety and hyperfixation on meals. It’s better for the dog’s metabolism and mental health to be fed every 12 hours,” she says. “More frequent feeding can also help guard against serious health issues, such as gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV), as the dog will consume a smaller amount of food and likely eat more slowly.” 
Avoid feeding your Labradoodle table scraps, which may be high in calories or fat—and they can even be dangerous for your dog. Treats should make up only 10% of your dog’s calorie intake and never replace their AAFCO-compliant diet.  
Unless recommended by a veterinarian, dogs fed a complete and balanced commercial food diet should not need any nutritional supplements. That’s why it’s so important to pick a food that’s catered to your Labradoodle’s life stage, whether they’re a puppy, adult, or senior.  
Your vet may recommend certain supplements depending on your dog’s unique health needs. Never feed a dog a supplement without speaking to your veterinarian first.
The high-energy, attention-seeking, intelligent Labradoodle requires frequent exercise, interaction, and play. “Labradoodles do best in homes with active [pet parents who] have time to devote to the dog,” says Whittenburg.   
The jolly Labradoodle’s amicable and playful qualities make them a prime companion for any household, including those with young children, feline friends, and other dogs. While every Labradoodle is different, proper socialization is a must for helping your dog become a well-behaved companion. 
“Labradoodles tend to do great with other animals and younger children if introduced slowly and properly,” says Christos Philippou, a dog trainer at Del K9 Academy. “Rushed introductions can lead to issues, so work with a trainer if you have any questions to make sure it goes as smoothly as possible.” 
Labradoodles adore company and relish time spent with their humans, but hate being left alone for long periods of time. Crate training your puppy and giving them interactive toys when you’re gone may prevent a Labradoodle from developing separation anxiety.
These dogs are not known to be excessive barkers, but the right amount of training and exercise is required to ensure they learn to behave appropriately.  
“They are incredible family dogs but certainly need a dedicated [pet parent] to work on their physical and mental needs,” says Philippou. 
Because Labradoodles are a hybrid of two of the smartest dog breeds, they are eager to please and highly trainable, Philippou says. They can be taught to excel at everything from basic tricks like sit, stay, and roll over to running agility courses.  
Always use positive reinforcement techniques during training, like using treats to reward good behaviors. It’s also important to train Labradoodle puppies at a very young age to ensure they develop good habits that will last throughout their lifetime and minimize mischievous behavior.
Due to their gentle and sharp-witted nature, Labradoodles can even be trained to become service dogs.  
Walking or running 
Hiking 
Fetch
Swimming 
Dock diving
Hunting 
Dog parks 
Tug-of-war 
Obedience
Agility training 
No Labradoodle is alike in size or personality—and they have varying coats to match. “Some have tight curls while some have loose, flowing locks of hair,” says Katlin Primrose, CAPG, CSP, a groomer and veterinary technician in Calgary, Canada.
While the breed is favored for having low-shedding levels, the dogs’ coats require a high-maintenance care routine that involves regular brushing and visits to a professional groomer.    
While Labradoodles don’t require a regular bathing routine, they may require a splash in the shower or tub if they get wet or dirty from romps outside. In that case, pet parents should use a dog shampoo to get their Labradoodle clean—never a human shampoo, which can cause skin problems.
To avoid painful tangles and matting, particularly around friction points such as the ears, rear end, and between the legs, Primrose urges Labradoodle parents to brush their dogs twice a week.  
“Pay special attention to friction areas,” she says. “Ensure you’re getting down to the skin, but don’t go over the same spot more than twice, as you may cause brush burn. If there is too much matting, it becomes painful, and it will force [a groomer] to shave your dog down to the skin.” 
Philippou recommends brushing your dog daily to prevent knots and mats and making an appointment with a professional groomer every two to three months to ensure the Labradoodle’s coat isn’t becoming overgrown.
Keep your pup’s bangs (or fringe) trimmed to ensure their fluffy locks don’t obstruct their vision.
Because Labradoodles are prone to congenital eye conditions such as progressive retinal atrophy, cataracts, and glaucoma, watch for respective symptoms, such as impaired night vision or cloudy lenses.  
Ear infections can be an issue for Labradoodles, so it’s important to monitor your pet’s ear hygiene and clean their ears regularly, particularly during and after bath time and if your pup goes for a swim.
Ask your veterinarian which ear-cleaning product they recommend for your dog.
Whether you love taking long strolls or hiking, your Labradoodle will make the perfect (leashed!) adventure partner.
These dogs are very loving and affectionate, but pet parents should be prepared to give them at least one hour of exercise daily. That could include one or two walks or a game of fetch in the yard or dog park. If the breed receives the proper amount of physical and mental stimulation, they can live in homes of all sizes, though one with a yard is preferred.  
Labradoodle puppies must also be trained at a young age to minimize their mischievous tendencies and enable them to withstand long and consistent grooming sessions (a must for the breed).
The average Labradoodle size is 50–75 pounds and 24 inches tall. Mini Labradoodles weigh 30 pounds, max.
Depending on a wide variety of factors—including the breeder, generation (the percentage of Poodle-to-Lab ratio varies), and age of the dog—the cost of a Labradoodle puppy can range roughly $1,000 to $4,000.
Pet parents should also consider the price of Labradoodle care, including grooming, training, and food, before bringing a puppy home. 
The typical lifespan of a Labradoodle is 12–15 years. But for the pups to live long, healthy, and happy lives, you must be dedicated to supplying the best care, including a nutritious and balanced diet, plenty of time and attention, and daily exercise.  
Goldendoodles and Labradoodles are two of the most popular doodle breeds. While they can look similar, the Goldendoodle is a cross between a Golden Retriever and Standard Poodle, while Labradoodles have a Labrador Retriever and a Standard Poodle as parents.
Goldendoodles are also known to be slightly less energetic than the Labradoodle, though both require regular physical activity. 
Labradoodles are often referred to as “hypoallergenic,” but no breed is 100% free of allergens. Because these dogs lose less hair, they are considered a preferred breed for people with allergies, though there is no guarantee that having a Labradoodle will prevent symptoms such as sneezing, watery eyes, and respiratory issues.
The amount of sensitivity to a dog’s allergens varies from person to person, so spend time with the breed to see how your allergies react before bringing home a Labradoodle puppy.
All dogs shed, but Labradoodles typically shed very little (though this varies dog by dog). This low rate of Labradoodle shedding is why the breed is considered to be “hypoallergenic.”
WRITTEN BY
Patricia Kaowthumrong
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.