Kaitlyn Arford
Schnoodles are a relatively new hybrid breed—a beautiful cross between Poodles and Schnauzers. Because both Poodles and Schnauzers come in three sizes (Toy, Miniature, and Standard for Poodles, and Miniature, Standard, and Giant for Schnauzers), full-grown Schnoodles can come in all different statures.
The American Canine Hybrid Club recognizes three Schnoodle sizes: the Giant Schnoodle, Standard Schnoodle, and Miniature Schnoodle.
As a Schnauzer-Poodle mix, Schnoodles are smart, loving, level-headed companions. And while no dog is truly hypoallergenic, both Schnauzers and Poodles can be good fits for some people with allergies—so the same goes for the hybrid.
Like their parent breeds, Schnoodle dogs are intelligent and lively. They pick up cues quickly, can learn lots of tricks, and their exercise needs are often met with a daily walk. When Schnoodle puppies are well-socialized and trained, they make great companions for people of all ages, including children.
But when it comes to grooming, this Schnauzer-Poodle mix can be a lot to deal with. Many need near-daily brushing at home, plus regular professional grooming appointments.
As a cross between a Poodle and a Schnauzer, a Schnoodle dog can inherit health issues from both breeds.
Schnoodles can inherit joint issues from their parents, including hip dysplasia and elbow dysplasia. Hip dysplasia is when the hip joint doesn’t fit together properly, causing it to be loose. Similarly, elbow dysplasia occurs when a dog’s elbow joint grows incorrectly, leading to an unstable joint. Responsible Schnoodle breeders will screen their dogs for these conditions.
Both conditions can be painful for dogs and eventually cause arthritis. Depending on the severity, treatment can involve medications, joint supplements, or even surgery.
Poodles and Miniature Schnauzers are both predisposed to diabetes, so Schnoodle dogs—especially Mini Schnoodles—can be, too. With this disorder, the dog’s body fails to properly produce insulin. Treatment is lifelong insulin and diet changes.
Schnauzers have an increased risk of epilepsy, which their Schnoodle puppies may inherit. Signs of a seizure include:
Falling down
Losing consciousness
Twitching legs
Foaming at the mouth
Emptying their bowels
Call your veterinarian immediately if your Schnoodle has a seizure. Epilepsy cannot be cured, but management is possible with medication.
Standard Poodles and Giant Schnauzers are at risk of gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV), a severe form of bloat in dogs. This occurs when the stomach fills with food and gas, then twists on itself. Because of their deep chest, Giant Schnoodles can also develop bloat or GDV.
GDV is a life-threatening condition that must be treated immediately. Take your dog to the vet if you notice signs of bloat, including:
Distended stomach
Retching
Excessive drooling
Pacing/inability to settle
Feed your Schnoodle a well-balanced diet of dog food approved by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Make sure the food is formulated for your Schnoodle’s life stage (puppy, adult, or senior). Talk to your veterinarian if you have questions about what food you should be feeding your pup.
Adult Schnoodles can eat two meals a day, while Schnoodle puppies should eat three or four meals daily on a consistent schedule.
If your Schnoodle is eating too fast, slow them down with a snuffle mat or a slow feeder. This will also help prevent your Giant Schnoodle from developing bloat.
How much food your Schnoodle gets varies from dog to dog. Your bag of AAFCO-approved dog food will have a feeding guide that gives recommended portions based on your pet’s ideal weight. But talking to your veterinarian is best, as they can tell you how much to feed your dog based on their weight, lifestyle, and health.
As long as you’re feeding your Schnoodle dog high-quality food, they shouldn’t need nutritional supplements. That said, your vet may recommend joint supplements if your dog develops hip or elbow dysplasia. Never give your dog supplements without talking with your vet first.
Schnauzers and Poodles both have a lot of energy, so Schnoodles need to be kept active. Without daily walks and playtime, they may be left with extra exuberance that can lead to destructive behaviors as they try to keep themselves entertained.
Schnoodles thrive when surrounded by others, whether that’s their pet parents, children, or other household pets. They are playful dogs that love romping around the backyard—or through the house, if you have a Mini Schnoodle—with kids. But as with any dog, interactions between kids and Schnoodles should always be supervised.
Poodles and Schnauzers are both smart, highly trainable dogs. Because of this, a Schnauzer-Poodle mix can learn basic training cues quickly and go on to learn more complex tricks. No matter if you’re teaching your dog to sit or how to jump through a hula hoop, always use positive reinforcement.
Like all breeds, Schnoodles need to be socialized as puppies. Exposing them to new people, animals, sounds, and situations will go a long way in making them polite pups as adults.
Tug-of-war
Fetch
Agility
Nose work
Learning new tricks
Obedience training
Swimming
Dock diving
Schnoodle dogs are more high maintenance when it comes to grooming. Ideally, they should go to a professional groomer every four to six weeks.
Along with professional appointments, Schnoodles also have at-home care needs. This includes brushing your dog’s teeth every day to deter dental disease and plaque buildup, and trimming their nails when you hear them click on the ground.
Schnoodles shouldn’t require special skin care, but they will need occasional baths to stay healthy. If you notice changes in your dog’s skin, such as abrasions, flaky skin, or rashes, contact your veterinarian.
Schnoodle coats are usually somewhere between wavy and curly, though some Poodle-Schnauzer mixes can have straighter fur. Though white Schnoodles are relatively common, their coats can also be brown, red, cream, black, or gray.
No matter their coat’s color and texture, all Schnoodles need regular grooming. Brush your dog at home a few times a week (if not every day), and schedule routine appointments with a professional dog groomer for a more thorough brush and trim.
Schnoodles can experience tear stains, so you should occasionally wipe right beneath their eyes with a damp cloth or dog face wipe. If you notice cloudiness, redness, discharge, or other eye changes, talk with your vet.
Clean your dog’s ears every time after they’re in water. This will help prevent moisture from becoming trapped in their ear canals, which can cause ear infections. Contact your vet if you see changes in your dog’s ears, including odor, redness, or debris buildup.
If you have the time (and budget!) to meet their grooming needs, a Schnoodle can be a good dog for you. These playful pups need to be kept active and mentally stimulated, but they don’t have the boundless energy of some other breeds. Many of them can live well in apartments, though Giant Schnoodles might appreciate a bit more room to spread out and run. 
Schnoodles can live to be 10–16 years old. Like with all dogs, small Schnoodles typically live longer than Giant Schnoodles.
Because Poodles and Schnauzers come in different sizes, Schnoodle sizes can vary greatly.
Miniature Schnoodles can weigh as little as 10 pounds.
Standard Schnoodles weigh between 50­–60 pounds.
A Giant Schnoodle can weigh as much as 80 pounds.
No dog is 100% hypoallergenic. But like both of their parent breeds, Schnoodles can be a good fit for some people with dog allergies. Spend time with the breed to see how your allergies react before bringing home a Schnoodle puppy.
Well-socialized Schnoodles can be great family dogs, and get along with kids and other pets.
Featured Image: Adobe/Yuval Helfman
WRITTEN BY
Kaitlyn Arford
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.