Sarah Kloepple
Adobe Stock/lexuss
Smooth Fox Terriers were originally bred to hunt, and were especially sharp at catching vermin and dislodging foxes. Hunters favored their white coat since it was easy to distinguish them from game, even in little light.
First known as English Terriers, it wasn’t until the 1860s that the breed coined the name Smooth Fox Terriers, according to the Smooth Fox Terrier Association (SFTA). The Smooth Fox Terrier dog breed strongly resembles the Wire Fox Terrier, and they were once considered the same breed. But in 1984, the American Kennel Club (AKC) recognized them as distinct breeds.
Smooth Fox Terriers have a flat, moderately narrow, V-shaped head and (of course) a smooth coat that is predominantly white. They’re known for their energetic, spirited personality. They stand up to 15.5 inches tall and weigh 15–18 pounds.
Expect a big personality in a small package with Smooth Fox Terriers. The breed is intelligent, inquisitive, and playful, making for a great family dog—so long as younger children know how to interact with pets. 
Smooth Fox Terriers have a high energy level that requires daily exercise such as walks, but when given room (like a fenced yard) they are happy to get energy out on their own. Because of their history as hunting dogs, expect a strong prey drive, a penchant for exploring, and an inherited tendency to bark and dig, though training at an early age can help curb unwanted behaviors.
Their smooth coat is generally low-maintenance, though they tend to shed more than their wire-haired relatives, so be prepared for the occasional brushing. 
Smooth Fox Terriers have an average lifespan of 10–13 years. They are generally healthy dogs but are prone to a few health concerns.
Although more common in older dogs, deafness can happen in dogs of any age and for several reasons.
Smooth Fox Terrier puppies can be born deaf (congenital deafness), usually due to defects in the inner ear. This is the most common cause of deafness in dogs, but it can only be reliably diagnosed in puppies older than 4 weeks old.
Veterinarians can diagnose deafness in dogs through a physical exam. Diagnostic testing such as blood work and imaging techniques can be helpful to find a possible underlying cause for a dog’s deafness.
Patellar luxation is a common condition in small dog breeds where the kneecap no longer sits properly in the knee joint and moves (luxates) to either side of the thigh bone as a dog moves. This can result in a three-legged gait or, when both knees are affected, bunny-hopping.
Many cases of patellar luxation can be managed medically with pain medication, joint supplements, and by keeping your dog at a healthy weight. Severe cases may require corrective surgery.
Terrier breeds are prone to primary lens luxation. PLL is when the eye lens (a small, clear disc that focuses light on the retina) moves out of its normal position. This can cause pressure to build up in the eye, resulting in painful glaucoma and blindness.
Symptoms of PLL include:
Excessive tearing and blinking
Rubbing at the face
Asymmetrical pupils
Red discoloration to the eye
A blue color on the eye’s surface
Primary lens luxation is considered a medical emergency, so contact your vet if you notice changes in your Smooth Fox Terrier’s eyes. Treatment depends on the condition’s severity.
Also commonly found in small dogs, Legg-Calve-Perthes disease is an orthopedic condition that primarily affects young pups—typically those less than 1 year old—while they are still growing. The head of the femur (the long bone in a dog’s hind leg that connects to the hip) loses blood supply, which causes bone death and significant joint changes.
Symptoms include stiffness when walking, lameness, joint pain, and reduced range of motion in the hips. Smooth Fox Terrier puppies can be treated for Legg-Calve-Perthes disease with non-steroidal anti-inflammatories and strict periods of rest, but surgery might ultimately be needed to fix the affected leg.
Smooth Fox Terriers have no specific dietary requirements and will benefit from any well-balanced commercial diet formulated for their life stage (puppy, adult, or senior). Dogs that compete in hunting trials or agility may benefit from a higher-calorie sport formulation.
Discuss your dog’s diet with your veterinarian. They can help you choose the best dog food for your pet.
Smooths are a highly energetic breed, so full-grown dogs will need two or three meals a day to keep them satisfied and healthy. Smooth Fox Terrier puppies will likely need more meals per day to avoid low blood sugar, which can be seen in small-breed puppies.
Consider a puzzle feeder, as these smart dogs love problem-solving. Ask your veterinarian about the best way to feed your Smooth.
Determine how much to feed your dog by talking with your veterinarian, who can calculate caloric needs for the individual pup. The feeding guide label on your dog food provides valuable feeding information as well.
Healthy Smooth Fox Terriers should be fed a balanced commercial diet that meets the standards set by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). This will provide them with all needed nutrients.
That said, your veterinarian may recommend certain supplements for your dog on a case-by-case basis. But don’t give your dog supplements without talking to your vet first.
Smooth Fox Terriers love to please. Along with having big personalities, they’re known for being devoted to and affectionate with their humans. They’re also known to get along well with children and make ideal family pets.
When it comes to other dogs and cats, early socialization is key. The breed’s hunting past means they may see other animals as something to bark at and chase, but early training can help manage this prey drive.
Smooth Fox Terriers are active dogs that enjoy long walks outside, where you might find them chasing squirrels and rabbits.
Because they were bred to hunt foxes, digging is one of their favorite pastimes. Pet parents of Smooths should make sure their yard and flowerbeds are secure. Monitored outdoor activity might be best for this breed, as they have been known to dig their way to escape. 
And although they’re small in stature, they “have a bark as big as their hearts,” according to the SFTA. They’re quick to let their pet parents know if there are unfamiliar people present, but they’ll also give friendly visitors a warm welcome. 
Smooth Fox Terriers are intelligent dogs that are eager to learn new skills and tricks. But they’re also independent, so be prepared for patience, consistent communication, routine, and lots of positive reinforcement during training. 
Long walks
Hiking
Agility
Earthdog trials
Hunting trials
Obedience
Overall, Smooth Fox Terriers are low-maintenance when it comes to grooming. 
Smooth Fox Terriers typically don’t require specific skin care. Ask your veterinarian how often you should bathe your dog, and contact them if you notice changes in your pup’s skin.
Smooth Fox Terriers often have a mostly white coat with black and/or tan markings. Their fur is short, and is quick to dry if wet or muddy.
Despite their short coat, Smooth Fox Terriers are moderate shedders. Brushing your dog once a week can help keep fur from ending up on your furniture.
Because Smooth Fox Terrier dogs are known to develop primary lens luxation, notify your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision, including unusual discharge or cloudiness.
Smooth Fox Terriers generally do not need special care for their ears. Because they can be prone to deafness, contact your vet if you notice changes in their hearing.
Look out for signs of an ear infection in your dog as well. These include debris in the ears, redness, and a bad odor. Talk to your vet if any of these symptoms appear.
Smooth Fox Terriers are sometimes referred to as “gentlemen” due to their dapper appearance, but there’s so much more to them than a polished look.
They’re gregarious, loving dogs that will thrive in a home willing to give them the attention and training they need to be ideal family pets. Because of their hunting history, Smooths will appreciate a home with a secured, fenced  yard to romp around and explore. Just make sure you pay close attention to their digging habits!
Yes. With proper training and socialization—and children who are aware of a dog’s boundaries—Smooth Fox Terriers can make great family pets.
Yes. Like most terriers, Smooth Fox Terriers are known to be vocal, as they were bred to use their bark to remove foxes from their burrows. Pet parents should expect barking as a main component of their communication.
Although Jack Russell Terriers and Smooth Fox Terriers share a similar appearance and are both known to be intelligent dogs, they are distinct breeds. You can tell them apart because Smooth Fox Terriers are generally larger than Jack Russells, and they have a longer snout.
These two terrier breeds share an ancestry, and both were bred to hunt rats and foxes, so you’ll find they have similar temperaments and behavioral traits. But Wire Fox Terriers have a dense, wiry double coat that requires regular stripping, while Smooth Fox Terriers have a smooth, low-maintenance coat.
WRITTEN BY
Sarah Kloepple
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.