Give your pet the life they deserve with PRONOVA
Non-invasive, data-driven, real-time health monitoring for proactive pet care
Get Started
How it Works
Create your Account
Create an account to manage your subscription, data, and all future offerings!
Pick your Plan
Choose how often you want to check in on your pup’s health, instead of waiting for things to go wrong.
Kora Strips are shipped to you.
Purchase your own Analyzer
With this powerful scientific device, you can use the Kora Strips to test your dog’s saliva in the conform of your home.
Download the PRONOVA App
Check to see their health levels and what you can do at home to give your best friend a better life, based on what they need.
Beneifts
Tailored results and recommendations for what your pup's needs.
Kora Strips help you test your pup's saliva at home
The PRONOVA analyzer is your "lab at home"
As easy as a saliva swab!
Choose how often you want to check your best friend's health, from weekly, monthly or quarterly!
Shipped directly to your home.
Give them the life they deserve by protecting their health.
At Home
From the comfort of your home.
Easy to use
All you need to do is swab, let the technology do the rest!
Saliva test
As easy as a COVID test, swab for 60 seconds.
Inflammation
Measuring CRP to detect inflammatory issues.
Stress
Measuring Cortisol to detect stress related issues.
Metabolic
Measuring glucose to detect metabolic & diabetic issues.
Heart
Measuring ProBNP to detect heart related issues.
Kidney
Measuring Urea to detect kidney related issues.
Liver
Measuring ALT to detect liver related issues.
Subscriptions Plans
All subscription plan includes a mandatory Pronova Analyzer for an additional fee of $119.99.
Preventative Plan
39.99 / Kora Strip
$29.99 / Kora Strip
1 test per week
$120 Billed every month
Recommended for all senior dogs and pet parents who want to be proactive and hands on with their pet’s health.
Get Started
Get Started
Proactive Plan
39.99 / Kora Strip
$34.99 / Kora Strip
1 test per month
$105 Billed every 3 months
Recommended for healthy senior dogs and pet parents who want to give their pup a better life.
Get Started
Get Started
Basic Plan
$39.99 / Kora Strip
1 test per quarter
$39.99 Billed every 3 months
Recommended for healthy young dogs and pet parents who want insights into what they can do better to take care of their dog.
Get Started
Get Started
Buy Products
PRONOVA Analysor (Replacement)
$169.99
Buy Now
Get Started
PRONOVA Strips (Top- up)
$39.99
Buy Now
Get Started